
## 📚 Sentence-level Fact-checked Annotated dataset
### Hyphen fine-grained explainability evaluation - Annotated dataset *release*! 💿
 
This is the **first-ever sentence-level fact-checked dataset**. 

**Abstract**: Fake news 📰 is often generated by **manipulating only a small part of the true information** i.e. entities, relations, small parts of a sentence, or a paragraph. It is possible that certain true information is also present in the news piece to make it more appealing to the public, and thus it is crucial to distinguish between true and/or fake parts of a piece of information. Thus, we utilise and release a **sentence-level fact-checked annotated dataset**. We annotate the **Politifact** dataset with ground truth evidence corresponding to different parts of the news text, by referring to fact-checking websites [Politifact](https://www.politifact.com/) and [Gossipcop](https://www.snopes.com/), and other trustable online sources. 

 **Annotation Process** 📝: To evaluate the efficacy of `Hyphen` in producing suitable explanations, we fact- check and annotate the Politifact dataset on a sentence-level. Each sentence has the following possible labels – `true`, `false`, `quote`, `unverified`, `non_check_worthy` or `noise`. 
 - The annotators were further supposed to arrange the fact-checked sentences in the order of their check-worthiness. We take the help of four expert annotators in the age-group of 25-30 years. The final labels for a sentence were decided on the basis of majority voting amongst the four annotators. 
 - To decide the final rank-list (since different annotators might have different opinions about the level of check-worthiness of the sentences), the fourth annotator compiled the final rank-list by referring to the fact-checked rank- lists by the first three annotators using **Kendall’s $\tau$ and Spearman’s $\rho$** rank correlation coefficients, and manually observing the similarities between the three rank-lists. 
 - The compiled list is then cross- checked and re-evaluated by the first three annotators for consistency.

 ### Dataset format ⚅
 
 Every `CSV` file, `politifact-annotation/politifact{news_id}.csv` represents the sentences from the news article `politifact{news_id}`. Every `CSV` file follows the schema `#sample`, `#sent_id`, `#sentences`, `#label`. 


 ### Label interpretations

 The following table lays down the meanings of each label in the annotated dataset:

| **Label** | **Explanation** |
|---|---|
| `true` | After verification from online sources, if it can be deduced that a claim being introduced by a sentence is true, then we label it True. |
| `fake` | After verification from online sources, if it can be deduced that a claim being introduced by a sentence is false, then we label it False. |
| `non_checkworthy` | If a given sentence is not check-worthy for fake news detection, we label it as not check-worthy, |
| `quote` | If a given sentence is a quote from someone’s speech/tweet/etc, label it as a quote. |
| `unverified` | If a situation arises that we are unable to arrive at any conclusion regarding the veracity of a particular sentence (after consulting to all online resources), then we label it as unverified.  |
| `noise` | Owing to scraping errors, it is possible that a sentence in the original scraped dataset would be a noisy one, and in such cases, we label it as noise. |


### What counts as a reliable source for Fact-checking?
- Fact-checking websites like **Politifact**, **Gossipcop** and **Snopes**.
- Trusted news providers like **BBC News**, The Indian Express, Economic Times, Hindustan Times, The Hindu, CNN, The New York Times, **Reports from Reuters**, etc.
- We don’t count **Wikipedia** as a reliable source.
- We don’t count any social media platform like Twitter, Reddit, Facebook, etc, as reliable. However, any tweet/post from a **verified social media account** would be counted as reliable (i.e. Blue ticks).
- Comments on social media posts by verified accounts count as a reliable source of information. 

## 📞 Contact
If you have any questions or issues, please feel free to reach out [Karish Grover](https://karish-grover.github.io/) at <a href="mailto:karish19471@iiitd.ac.in">karish19471@iiitd.ac.in</a>.

## ✏️ Citation

If you think that this annotated dataset is helpful, please feel free to leave a star ⭐️ and cite our paper:

```
@article{grover2022public,
  title={Public Wisdom Matters! Discourse-Aware Hyperbolic Fourier Co-Attention for Social-Text Classification},
  author={Grover, Karish and Angara, SM and Akhtar, Md and Chakraborty, Tanmoy and others},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.13017},
  year={2022}
}
```